Welcome to JW Broadcasting®.
This month, we’ll discuss something
that’s easy to talk about but difficult to do
—making wise decisions.
We’ll hear what wise choices
Greg and Joren Harris made
as they raised their children.
We’ll also catch up with Enrique Torres,
a man who made great changes in his life,
and we’ll learn what helped him
stick to those changes.
And the latest episode of Iron Sharpens Iron
will show us
how to be adaptable in our ministry.
This is JW Broadcasting for April 2023!
The theme of this month’s program
is “Make Wise Decisions.”
And our discussion is based on Job 34:11.
Let’s read that together:
“For he [Jehovah] will reward a man
“according to what he does
and bring upon him
the consequences of his ways.”
As highlighted in this scripture,
our actions are very important.
And our actions are usually the result
of decisions we make.
Some decisions are made
after a lot of serious thought.
Others, though, are made very quickly.
But no matter how much thought
goes into making a decision,
we need to recognize this basic fact:
Wise decisions bring positive rewards,
and wrong decisions can result
in very negative consequences.
Of course, all of us
want to make wise decisions.
But what are wise decisions?
Wise decisions are those
that please our heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Most of us have already made
some very good decisions.
These include the big decisions in life,
such as dedicating ourselves to Jehovah
and getting baptized
and deciding not to become involved
in the religious and political disputes
of this world.
No doubt,
before we made those major decisions,
we spent a lot of time praying about them
and seeking Jehovah’s direction.
And we’ve seen his blessing in our lives
because of these right decisions.
In this program, though,
we won’t be discussing such major decisions.
Rather, we’ll focus on decisions
that may be viewed by some as minor.
However, some of these
can lead to very serious consequences.
First, we’ll consider a Bible example
of a person who served Jehovah
and yet made some wrong decisions
along the way.
We’ll analyze
what caused this faithful servant
to make these wrong decisions.
Then we’ll consider what we need to do
in order to make wise decisions.
Finally, we’ll consider what we need to do
if we realize we’ve already made
an unwise decision.
So to start, let’s discuss
a faithful servant of Jehovah
who made some unwise decisions.
The example we have in mind
is that of King Jehoshaphat.
What was Jehovah’s view
of King Jehoshaphat?
Let’s see the answer
at 2 Chronicles chapter 17
and verses 3 and 4:
“Jehovah continued with Jehoshaphat
“because he walked
in the former ways of his forefather David
“and did not search for the Baals.
“For he searched for the God of his father
“and followed his commandment
and not the practices of Israel.”
That sounds like a wonderful commendation,
doesn’t it?
Yes, Jehoshaphat was a faithful king.
He made the wise decision
to worship Jehovah.
But even so,
he still made
some very unwise decisions.
Let’s read
about one of those unwise decisions
at 2 Chronicles 18:1:
“Jehoshaphat had riches
and glory in abundance,
but he made a marriage alliance with Ahab.”
Yes, he made his son
marry Ahab’s daughter Athaliah.
Now, that was a very unwise decision.
Why?
Because Ahab had built a temple for Baal
and had even employed 850 false prophets.
Ahab was also married
to wicked Queen Jezebel.
Who would want their child
to marry into such a bad family?
What was Jehoshaphat thinking?
Why did he arrange for this marriage?
Perhaps he wanted to reunite the 12 tribes,
or he may have had some political
and commercial motives
for wanting to have Ahab as an ally.
Even though we don’t know
for sure the reason,
we do know there were consequences.
Because of this close relationship with Ahab,
Jehoshaphat felt obligated to support Ahab
in a war against the Syrians.
However, this led
to yet another unwise decision.
As they were preparing for this battle,
Jehoshaphat asked for direction
from one of Jehovah’s prophets.
Ahab, though, expressed
his hatred for the prophet
and, after hearing the prophet’s message,
had him thrown into prison.
At that point,
it was decision time for Jehoshaphat.
What did he decide to do?
Although he initially disagreed with Ahab,
he eventually joined him in the battle.
Jehoshaphat disregarded
the warning from Jehovah.
But then this led him
to still another unwise decision
—this time an incredibly foolish decision.
What happened?
Jehovah’s prophet had foretold
that the Israelites would lose
their shepherd, or king, in battle.
So Ahab said that he would disguise himself
and not enter the battle dressed as a king.
He then said that Jehoshaphat
should still dress like a king.
Now, just think about that for a moment.
Ahab was basically saying,
‘You go out into battle
with a target on your back,
and I’ll hide in disguise.’
Really?
Jehoshaphat’s decision to agree to do that
was not only unwise but also foolish.
It nearly cost him his life.
So why would he do that?
Insight on the Scriptures  says
that perhaps Jehoshaphat
didn’t want “to go back
on his original promise to accompany Ahab.”
So maybe he would have lost face
if he backed out
of the agreement at that point.
Although Jehoshaphat did survive the battle,
Jehovah sent another prophet to him
to say what’s recorded at 2 Chronicles 19:2:
“Is it the wicked you should be helping,
“and is it those
who hate Jehovah you should love?
Because of this the indignation
of Jehovah is against you.”
Although Jehovah acknowledged
the good things
that Jehoshaphat had accomplished
in other aspects of his life,
Jehoshaphat clearly made
some very unwise decisions.
What lessons do we learn
from Jehoshaphat’s wrong decisions?
Lesson 1:
Just because we’ve done
many good things in Jehovah’s service
doesn’t mean
that we’ll always make wise decisions.
Lesson 2:
Making friendships with those
who hate Jehovah
can put us under pressure
to make other unwise decisions.
Lesson 3:
Even though
we may seek Jehovah’s direction,
we must follow it
if we want to make wise decisions.
Lesson 4:
If we realize
that we’ve made an unwise decision,
don’t keep going in the same course.
Stop and change direction.
These lessons can be summarized
in the words of Proverbs 22:3.
There we’re told:
“The shrewd one sees the danger
and conceals himself,
“but the inexperienced keep right on going
and suffer the consequences.”
Yes, we need to see
the possible consequences of wrong decisions
and then take action to avoid them.
What were some of the consequences
of Jehoshaphat’s unwise decisions?
It nearly cost him his life.
His oldest son died an apostate.
And later, his daughter-in-law Athaliah
killed all the heirs to the throne
except one baby
and set herself up as queen of Judah.
But you might be thinking,
‘Still, Jehovah viewed Jehoshaphat
as a good king.’
Yes, he did.
And it’s encouraging for us to know
that even if we have made
some unwise decisions,
it’s possible that Jehovah
may still view us as his faithful servants.
Does that mean, then,
that our decisions are not so important?
The Watchtower  back in 1980
made this interesting comparison.
It used an illustration of two ship captains.
One skillfully maneuvered his ship
through a storm,
bringing the vessel
and his crew safely to shore.
But the other captain made unwise decisions,
and because of that,
he experienced shipwreck
during the same storm, saving only his life.
While both captains escaped with their lives,
the one whose ship remained intact
would certainly enjoy
greater happiness and honor, wouldn’t he?
It’s obvious
which captain Jehoshaphat was like.
Unlike Jehoshaphat,
surely we’d prefer
to be like the successful captain
—the one whose ship remained intact.
How can we make sure
that we are like the successful captain?
Back in 2011, the April Watchtower
had a special chart
entitled “Steps to Making Good Decisions.”
It listed these steps
in making wise decisions:
(1) Avoid being presumptuous.
(2) Do research.
(3) Pray for wisdom.
(4) Make the decision.
(5) Implement the decision.
But then there was an additional step:
(6) Review and adjust.
Why is step 6 listed?
Well, from time to time,
we need to review decisions
we’ve already made.
As we do so, perhaps we’ll come to realize
that some of them
were not the best decisions.
Can you still be like the successful captain?
Yes, you can!
How?
If you courageously make
the needed adjustments.
We must acknowledge that not all decisions
work out exactly as we had planned.
As Ecclesiastes 9:11 reminds us,
“time and unexpected events
overtake [us] all.”
So, what should we do if that’s the case?
The same Watchtower  of 2011
answers that question for us.
After saying that Jehovah expects us
to live up to such decisions
as our dedication and our marriage vows,
it went on to say:
“Most decisions, though, are less weighty.
“A wise person will from time to time
“review the decisions he has made.
“He will not let pride or stubbornness
“prevent him from adjusting
“or even reversing a decision.
“His prime concern is to make sure
that his life course continues to honor God.”
Thinking back
to the illustration of the two captains,
at times they may need
to reverse a former unwise decision.
That happened
during a hurricane back in 1889.
The captain of the British ship Calliope
was anchored in the harbor
in Apia, Western Samoa,
when a hurricane started blowing.
Initially, he decided,
like all the other captains in the harbor,
to weather the storm where he was.
But as the waves grew in height
and the dangers increased,
the captain realized
he had made the wrong decision.
What did he do?
He courageously reversed his decision
and headed out to open sea.
It was difficult, but ultimately
he saved himself,
his ship, and the 250 sailors on board.
This bold act of courage
entered him into the annals of naval history.
To be like that courageous captain,
at times we need
to prayerfully reexamine our past decisions.
These could be decisions
about our employment,
entertainment, education,
or even where we live.
When we made the original decisions,
they may have seemed wise to us.
But do they still seem that way now?
If we see the dangerous winds
of bad consequences
and the frightening
waves of disaster approaching
because our decisions were not
completely in harmony with Jehovah’s will,
what should we do?
Be like the wise captain.
Don’t worry about losing face.
Be courageous!
Pray for Jehovah’s help,
and then take bold action.
Make the changes you need to make
in order to continue to please Jehovah.
In this way, you’ll make the wise decision
—the one that leads to success,
the one that Jehovah will bless.
One thing that will help us
make wise decisions
is to remember the big picture,
not just what happens today,
but how this will affect our future.
In other words, don’t just think of now
—think of forever.
That’s the theme of our music video
for this month.
In this world, it can be hard—
Not just to follow your heart—
To be diff’rent
and do what’s right.
But Jehovah tells us in his Word:
‘Don’t be molded by this world.’
He promises life
in Paradise.
So stand tall;
give your all.
Jehovah’s right there with you;
he won’t let you fall.
And pray
ev’ry day
To climb those mountains out there
standing in your way.
Oh, don’t live for today;
live for forever.
They will try and offer fame—
Put a spotlight on your name,
Raise you up
for all to see.
But rather than strive after wind,
Jehovah says reach out to him.
He promises life
in Paradise.
So stand tall;
give your all.
Jehovah’s right there with you;
he won’t let you fall.
And pray
ev’ry day
To climb those mountains out there
standing in your way.
Oh, don’t live for today;
live for forever.
So stand tall;
give your all.
Jehovah’s right there with you;
he won’t let you fall.
And pray
ev’ry day
To climb those mountains out there
standing in your way.
Oh, don’t live for today;
live for forever.
No matter how long
we’ve been serving Jehovah
or what changes we face in life,
we can always
keep our hope of living forever.
Reflecting on this hope
can help us make wise decisions
at any stage in life.
Earlier we discussed that, at times,
we need to review
a decision we made previously.
In our next segment,
a family decides to move
to a foreign-language field.
Does this prove
to be a wise decision for them?
Let’s see how things turn out.
Hey, you.
Are you ready?
The Haitian community in our area
was growing,
and a new Haitian Creole congregation
was formed nearby.
We checked out their territory
and saw that they needed a lot of help.
“Step on over.”
So should we do this?
I’ve been praying for more studies.
I think this might just be my answer.
Yeah?
I’m in.
Good. Then as soon as we get home,
we can pray about it.
Our new language was exciting.
We spent every spare second we had
trying to get better.
We had so much joy,
but we had challenges too.
Nicolas,
could you read the next paragraph
for us, please?
Yeah, sorry.
Where are we?
Our study was so nice today,
wasn’t it, Nicolas?
It was.
And yet again, I was totally lost.
We didn’t realize
that Nico just wasn’t finding
the same joy as us.
To help Nico,
we did a few more things in our language.
Besides family worship,
we attended one meeting a month
with our old congregation.
Well, honestly,
I’m a little worried about Nico.
He’s having a tough time
adapting to our new congregation.
Hmm, I get it.
You know, back when we first joined
a foreign-language congregation,
everything was fun and new.
But after a little while,
we noticed that our kids
had lost their enthusiasm.
They were still hearing about Jehovah,
but, honestly, they weren’t learning
because it wasn’t in their language.
Is that why you moved back?
It was.
But every family is different.
We each have to decide
what’s best for our own.
Thanks, that’s true.
I found the perfect article
to help us decide what to do.
It mentioned the example of Daniel.
He had to speak
different languages every day,
but he made sure to study in Hebrew,
his language.
The article mentioned Psalm 119:11:
“In my heart I treasure up your saying.”
For Nico to treasure God’s Word in his heart,
we felt he needed even more guidance
in the language of his heart.
The truth is,
when I’m at the meeting in my language,
it’s different.
I don’t have to think a lot
just to understand what I’m hearing.
Well, I think it’s clear
what’s best for our family.
It is.
But what about your students?
It’s OK, Nico.
We’ll find a way to help them.
The language we’re immersed in every day
is the language of your heart.
So it’s best for you
to keep growing spiritually
in that same language.
It was the best decision
in order for Nico to stay close to Jehovah.
But we did miss the Haitian Creole field.
So a few years later . . .
Are you ready?
I’m a little nervous, but I think I’m ready.
We decided it was the right time
to move back.
We’re so glad our decision helped Nico
build a solid foundation
for his faith and his future.
How encouraging it was to be reminded
that when we make a decision,
we can always make adjustments later!
Have you ever made a decision
that seemed wise at first,
but then over time,
as things changed in your life,
didn’t seem so good?
Maybe you felt, ‘I’ll be a failure
if I leave this assignment.’
Remember, our primary concern
must be to make sure
that our life course continues to honor God.
Have the courage
to consider making a change
if your circumstances have changed.
Greg and Joren Harris
raised their children to love Jehovah.
What decisions did they make along the way?
When a person makes a sacrifice,
they give up something
for something that they consider
is of higher value.
What kind of a price tag can you put
on your child’s love for Jehovah?
on serving Jehovah whole-souled as a family?
When I found out
that we were going to have a family,
it was overwhelming for me.
When you come into the truth—
We weren’t Witnesses when I was a child.
Sometimes you’re exposed to things
that leave you with baggage,
leave you unsure of yourself.
You need constant reassurance
that you’re going to be OK,
that you can take care
of any situation that comes along.
My dad—he gave me all I needed.
He loved me so much.
I would take my mother’s knitting yarn,
and I would tie it to his door handle
after he went to sleep.
And I would run it
across the hall to my bedroom
and tie it to my big toe
so that when he opened
his door in the morning,
I would wake up
and I could be with him.
That love that I had for my dad
—I wanted them to love Jehovah that much.
I wanted a string tied
around their hearts right to Jehovah
so that he was the one motivating them
and he was the one
waking them up spiritually every day.
I loved to teach the children things,
and I would do it at any available moment.
And then, of course,
at night, as a family
(usually on our bed),
we would read our Bible together.
It was the glue that kept us tied to Jehovah
and kept us tied to each other.
In Judges 7, Gideon said:
“Watch me and do . . . what I do.”
So I knew that if we wanted
the children to live the truth,
we had to live it with them.
It couldn’t be something
that we just taught them.
We had to live our life of service
to Jehovah with them.
Jesus said that obviously
we ‘can’t slave for two masters.’
And I’ve tried to do that and, believe me,
it does not work.
Like any father,
I wanted to have a home for my family.
My profession was building houses,
but that cost me my pioneering.
And so I decided
I had to quit building houses.
So I did.
I started to do remodel jobs.
And we looked for a place
that we could afford
that would sustain us
in the full-time service,
and Jehovah provided
exactly what we needed.
One of the highlights of raising the children
was the annual visits
to unassigned territory.
The success in the ministry was phenomenal.
So we decided as a family
to take on the challenge of learning Spanish.
We had a large Spanish-speaking population
in our territory
and in the surrounding territories,
and there was no group
or congregation to help them.
When we would go out
of the country to preach, we would often stay
with family members of our Bible students
or our brothers and sisters
in these countries,
in some very humble surroundings,
and we took advantage
of the hospitality that they offered us
because we wanted
to live the culture with them.
It just opened our eyes to a world
that we never knew existed.
Our family was able to progress
and flourish spiritually
because of a concentrated effort
by Joren and me.
She’s been there
to fill in all of the cracks.
He always made it so easy to love him,
to love the children,
and to really focus on spiritual things.
When we pray to Jehovah,
thinking about our family
being able to serve him like this,
we just say thank you.
We just try in some way
to express how deeply we feel
about this privilege that we have
to be with Kaarsten and Kjersti
and Andrea and Dhimo.
We don’t deserve
any of these blessings from Jehovah,
but somehow he’s blessed our efforts,
and he’s given us an opportunity to smile
and reflect on all of the things
that he’s done for us.
And what can we do to repay Jehovah
but just keep going, keep trying,
and keep moving forward
until we’re on the other side?
Thank you, Brother and Sister Harris ,
for sharing your experience
in such a heartfelt way.
You decided to put spiritual things first
in your children’s lives
and gave them the chance
to have a friendship with Jehovah.
What happens to us in childhood
can shape who we become as adults,
for better or for worse.
If we don’t like who we are now,
we can change,
as we’ll see in the latest installment
of Where Are They Now?
Hello, who is it?
Hey, hi. How are you?
OK, come on up.
My name is Enrique Torres, Jr.
I live on Staten Island, New York,
and I have the privilege to serve
in the Mid-Island Congregation.
The first 40 years of my life were mired
in a lifestyle that was horrendous.
A judge stated that I had
a “propensity for criminality.”
No doubt, he was describing a vicious person.
As a youth, I was hanging around
with the wrong kind of people
that led me into a life of crime
and debauchery.
This captain in our prison came up
with a psychological plan
to take the individuals
that had the potential for leadership
and put them in isolation.
I wound up to be among them.
Can you imagine, they were getting beat up?
It was becoming too much for me
—the screams and so forth.
I said, “If this continues,
I’m not going to survive here.”
I did get in contact with my father
and he told me:
“Never forget Jehovah.
That is his name.”
And that’s all I got out of it.
I knew that there was nobody
that could help me but God.
So that’s when I found myself
in prayer to Jehovah.
I vowed that I would make it my business
to learn more about him
than just his name.
At that time, that’s all I knew.
I got some literature; I got the Bible too.
Jehovah became more meaningful to me.
That’s when he became real to me.
That was the first 40 years of my life.
But the last 40 years of my life
with Jehovah’s training
from his organization,
my personality—it was transformed.
The blessings that I have received
have been in the area of my field service
and also my teaching ability,
which has helped me
to be able to draw closer to Jehovah.
I was privileged to become
a ministerial servant for many years
and a field service overseer
for many more years.
One of the main challenges that I’m facing is
that I have developed cancer
and have gone through four cancer operations
and also some chemotherapy.
Without relying upon Jehovah to help me
to overcome these challenges,
there’s no doubt in my mind that I
never would have been able to make it.
I would recommend to avoid
that trap that I fell into
—hanging around with street gangs
and then getting involved
in burglaries and robberies.
It’s a progression.
It was not anything of value at all.
Instead, what it brought me
was a lot of grief,
mental scars, and also
a lot of trouble with my conscience.
Study God’s Word, the Bible,
so that you may be able
to see what Jehovah has in store
for the future.
And also, you’ll be able to see
that he’s a kind, merciful, loving God
that doesn’t want anyone to be destroyed
but wants them to have life.
Parents, never give up on your children.
Jehovah never gave up on me.
He rescued me from this spiritual darkness
that I was in,
and he brought me into his light
and to his wonderful organization.
And I give him all the credit for that.
And when I speak to people,
that’s what I tell them.
I tell them: “It wasn’t me.
“It was Jehovah that has done all of this,
and he could do that for you too
if you give him an opportunity.”
Early in life,
Enrique’s poor choice of friends
led him to make many other bad decisions.
But in his 40’s,
he decided to get to know Jehovah.
What a good reminder
that we can continue
to make changes later on in life!
And you parents, please keep in mind
that the seeds of truth you planted
in your children’s hearts
can move them to make good decisions later,
even as adults.
Some of our decisions may seem small,
yet they can have a powerful effect
on our brotherhood.
In the next video,
Brother Robert Luccioni
discusses how our response to someone
can make peace or break it.
So our Scripture text for today
discusses the qualities needed
“to walk worthily”
and in a way that pleases Jehovah.
Now, you notice our Scripture text,
Ephesians 4:1, is only a partial sentence.
Let’s read the entire sentence,
which takes in verses 1-3.
Ephesians 4:1-3—he says:
“Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord,
“appeal to you to walk worthily
of the calling with which you were called,
“with all humility
and mildness, with patience,
“putting up with one another in love,
“earnestly endeavoring
to maintain the oneness of the spirit
in the uniting bond of peace.”
So here the apostle Paul
links ‘walking worthily’ with unity,
and you notice the qualities
that are needed to do that.
He says that we need ‘humility,
mildness, and patience.’
Now, this is not the only time
that the apostle Paul
links these three qualities
with being in unity.
We may remember Colossians 3:12,
and it tells us
to “clothe [ourselves] with . . .
humility, mildness, and patience.”
Why?
So that we can
“continue putting up with one another.”
So why are these qualities
so essential to peace and to unity?
Well, what do the Scriptures say about them?
Well, perhaps we think of the scripture
at Philippians 2:3, 4, which says:
“Do nothing out of contentiousness
or out of egotism,
but with humility
consider others superior to you.”
See, that brings about peace and unity.
Or Proverbs 15:1:
“A mild answer turns away rage.”
Or Proverbs 25:15:
“By patience a commander is won over.”
See, humility, mildness, patience
—these qualities are so vital
for taking tension out of a situation
and allowing for humility
and unity and peace.
Now, there are many accounts in the Bible
that illustrate this fact,
and we’re going to consider just one
—that of the Ephraimites and Gideon.
If you look in your Bibles
in Judges chapters 6 and 7,
it sets out the account
of Gideon going against the Midianites.
We remember that
in response to Jehovah’s direction,
Gideon won against Midian
—first with 32,000 men
and then finally weeded down
to only 300 men.
Now, if you look in your Bibles,
the Study Bible  map B6
helps us to visualize the strategy
that Gideon used with Jehovah’s direction.
Now, the Midianites
gathered near the hill of Moreh,
and you can see that here on the map.
And if you look at Judges 6:34,
we’re reminded
that “Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gideon.”
So here he’s operating
under Jehovah’s spirit.
So, what did he do?
First off, he calls
on the tribes of Manasseh,
Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali to assist.
And that makes sense
because you can see where those tribes were
in relation to where the fighting was going to be.
Then at Judges 7:22,
Gideon’s initial attack
threw the Midianites into confusion.
And so the Midianites
fled south toward Abel-meholah.
Verse 23 of chapter 7 says
that he then calls on Naphtali,
Asher, and Manasseh
to chase after them and push them
toward the south, further south.
And you can see the logic in that.
But then in an excellent strategy
in verses 24 and 25, to head them off,
he also calls on Ephraim
to capture the waters as far as Beth-barah
and block their escape, and they do.
And they’re successful;
the two main princes of Midian are killed.
It’s victory
—an excellent strategy—
one of the greatest and most courageous
and bravest battles in the Bible.
In fact, interestingly,
there’s no record ever again
of the Midianites bothering Jehovah’s people
after this victory.
Can you imagine having a share in that project,
how excited you would be?
Well, not everybody was.
Look at Judges 8:1;
it says: “Then the men of Ephraim
said to him [to Gideon]:
“‘What have you done to us?
“Why did you not call us
when you went to fight against Midian?’
And they quarreled bitterly with him.”
What was Ephraim’s problem?
Well, they felt they
should have been involved earlier
or that perhaps the situation
should have been handled differently.
‘Why weren’t we involved?
Why didn’t you call us?
‘We didn’t know anything that was going on.
Then we had to drop everything
and come and bail you out.’
Well, did Ephraim
have humility, mildness, and patience?
Well, far from it.
And it was disrupting unity.
Now, how did Gideon respond?
Now, we remember,
Gideon had Jehovah’s spirit
and he had an excellent strategy
that led to an outstanding victory
for Jehovah.
How did he respond?
Well, look at verses 2 and 3.
It says: “But he said to them:
‘What have I done compared with you?
“‘Are not the gleanings of Ephraim
better than the grape harvest of Abiezer?
“‘It was into your hand
“‘that God gave Midian’s princes
Oreb and Zeeb,
“and what have I done compared with you?’
When he spoke this way, they calmed down.”
You see, Gideon showed humility,
mildness, and patience.
The result?
Everyone calmed down,
and Gideon was able
to get on with Jehovah’s work at hand.
Now, we contrast that to the next time
that the Ephraimites pulled the same trick,
as recorded in Judges chapter 12.
There you remember
that they accused Jephthah
of not calling them into battle—same story.
What did Jephthah do?
Well, he says:
‘Well, I did call you into battle,
and you didn’t come,
so I just did it myself.’
The next thing you know,
they’re fighting among themselves,
completely distracted
from carrying on Jehovah’s work.
What’s the lesson?
Well, the lesson is
that things happen at times
that make peace go away.
Sometimes brothers in the congregation,
at Bethel, on a construction site
may react like Ephraimites.
Sometimes we react like Ephraimites.
‘Why didn’t you ask my opinion?
‘I was supposed to be involved in this.
‘Why did you call me last minute when
you knew you needed this two weeks ago,
and now I have to drop everything
and help you out.’
See, that happens; we’re only human.
Well, when it happens, how will we react?
You see, unity is more important
than who is right and who is wrong,
and Gideon understood that simple truth.
And unity is so important today.
There was an interesting,
beautiful Watchtower  article
in 2014, December 15,
and the article was entitled
“Facing the End of This Old World Together.”
And it stated this; it said:
“One of the darkest periods
in human history nears. . . .
For God’s people,
it will be a time for unity.”
It goes on to say:
“During the coming
time of trouble for this system,
we will have to be truly united.”
So let me ask you,
Do you think it’s any coincidence
that here,
where we are in the stream of time,
that we see Jehovah pulling his organization
closer and closer together in unity?
Is it any coincidence
that we hear over and over again
of the need for peace and for unity?
No!
You see, as this world
gets more and more divided,
fragmented, fighting,
we need to pull
tighter and tighter together in unity.
And that requires that all of us
work on these beautiful qualities
of humility, mildness, and patience.
And when there’s a lack of unity,
what do we have to do?
Well, we have to look at ourselves.
You see, generally we find
that the problem is me; it’s us.
Maybe we weren’t consulted
as soon as we should have been.
Or maybe our idea of how the work
or this thing should be done
wasn’t shared by others.
But in the grand scheme of things,
does it really make a difference?
And many times
when we look at a situation afterward
and we pull back unemotionally,
we generally find that, well,
maybe our idea was pretty good,
but the timing wasn’t good.
Or maybe it wasn’t
that great of an idea after all.
Or maybe there was more than one way
for this thing to be handled.
Or perhaps Jehovah’s spirit
was leading things in a different direction.
Well, again, what can help us
to not be an obstacle to unity?
Humility, mildness, patience
—just what we were considering
in Ephesians chapter 4.
You see, we have to have the confidence
that if it’s important to Jehovah,
it’ll happen.
And if not, what a shame it would be
if we become an obstacle to unity
over something
that’s not that important to Jehovah!
You see, brothers and sisters,
we need the “Gideons”
to help us
in our support of the Governing Body.
Gideon was such a beautiful example.
Once he understood Jehovah’s direction,
he was willing to run into the fire
for Jehovah and for his organization.
That’s what we need.
We need “Gideons.”
We don’t need any more “Ephraimites.”
So in harmony with today’s text,
may each one of us walk worthily
in these last days
and work on the qualities
of humility, mildness, and patience.
And if we do,
we will be a uniting force for good
and of Gideonlike value
to Jehovah and the organization
in the troublesome days ahead.
When we’re humble
and add to the peace of the congregation,
we make Jehovah happy.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we cherish our privilege
to share the good news with others.
What can help us
be adaptable in our ministry?
Please enjoy the latest installment
of Iron Sharpens Iron.
Hi, I am Michalis,
and this is “Iron Sharpens Iron.”
One challenge that often makes me nervous
is when I’ve prepared an introduction
and I’ve planned the conversation
but the householder doesn’t follow the plan
and I have to adapt.
Have you ever had that experience?
This could mean
that what we prepared just won’t work.
So we are going to discuss four tips
that have helped me and hopefully
will help you be more adaptable.
The four tips are
(1) know your territory,
(2) make use of the Teaching Toolbox,
(3) anticipate
common objections or questions,
and (4) be flexible
and adjust to the householder’s needs,
because remember,
this is meant to be a conversation,
not a sermon or a sales pitch.
Now, let’s look at a situation
where applying
these four suggestions can help.
So, what introduction are you using?
I thought I would talk
about economic problems.
Mm.
Good idea!
It really suits the territory.
Thanks.
I’ll read Isaiah 65:21-23
and then offer the Kingdom  tract.
Perfect.
I’ll get the scripture ready.
Excellent.
Good morning.
Many people in our area
struggle to make ends meet.
Do you think there will ever be a time
when we won’t have to stress about money?
Actually, now isn’t a good time.
I just received some bad news.
I’m sorry.
We’ll come back another time then.
Thank you.
OK.
Our sister applied
our first two tips really well.
But our sisters are usually excellent
when it comes to the ministry
so no real surprises there.
Did you notice?
First, she knew her territory well
and had a presentation
designed specifically for it.
Second, her scripture and talking point
were taken from the tract
What Is the Kingdom of God?,
which, as you know,
is part of our Teaching Toolbox.
However, when the householder
had something else on her mind,
our sister opted to return later.
That could be a good decision
in this kind of situation,
but let’s see what would happen
if she were to ask just one more question
and adapt according
to the householder’s response.
Actually, now isn’t a good time.
I just received some bad news.
I’m sorry.
Is there anything we can do to help?
No.
I, uh, I- I just heard
that my sister has cancer.
Oh, that must be so difficult
for your sister
and for you!
Yes, when someone we love is suffering,
we can often feel helpless.
That’s exactly how I feel.
If you have a moment,
could I show you something
that I find comforting
about a time in the near future
when our loved ones will never suffer again?
Hmm, I’d like that.
Notice what the Bible says
at Revelation 21:3, 4:
“With that I heard a loud voice
from the throne say . . .”
Wow!
Did you see how she was able
to offer this woman real comfort
just by being adaptable?
All it took was one simple question,
Is there anything we can do to help?
She was sincere and friendly,
and the householder responded.
At that point,
our sister applied our third tip.
She obviously was familiar
with some common anxieties
of ones in that territory
because she smoothly transitioned
to the topic of suffering,
which allowed her to listen
to the householder’s real concern
and then implement our fourth tip.
She adjusted to meet those needs.
Plus, she didn’t struggle
to find information to use.
She stayed right there
in her Teaching Toolbox.
Granted, not every situation
will be as straightforward as this,
and it takes time and experience
to get comfortable moving
from one topic to another.
But if we apply our four tips:
know your territory,
make use of the Teaching Toolbox,
try to anticipate
common objections or questions,
and then adjust to the householder’s needs,
by applying these,
we’ll find very quickly
that we are having meaningful conversations
and are able to share targeted truths
with those most in need.
As always, these are just a few techniques
that have worked for me,
and I hope they work for you.
Remember, part of the beauty of our ministry
is that we continue to sharpen one another.
What good suggestions!
In this example,
the sister was able to start a conversation
with a simple “good morning.”
Of course, in real life,
the way you greet people in your territory
might be different
than what we saw in the video.
We hope you’ve enjoyed this month’s theme,
“Make Wise Decisions.”
Before we conclude,
we’d like to introduce you
to our brothers and sisters
living in a land rich in Bible history
—Greece!
Greece is a mountainous country,
located at the southernmost part
of the Balkan peninsula,
with a rugged and diverse landscape.
It also includes more than 2,000 islands.
And with one of the longest coastlines
in all of Europe,
this is a land of beautiful beaches
and sheltered coves.
Greece is known for its classic
Mediterranean cuisine and delicacies
like moussaka, made from eggplant,
and dolmadakia, stuffed grape leaves
usually filled with rice and herbs.
A less familiar part of the Greek diet
is Chios mastiha,
or mastic gum,
which is made from the sap of a tree
grown only on the small island of Chios.
In ancient times,
people chewed mastic to freshen their breath;
it was an early version of chewing gum.
Today, it’s typically used
to flavor everything from bread to ice cream.
The preaching of the good news in Greece
goes all the way back to the first century,
when the apostle Paul
first “[stepped] over into Macedonia.”
He landed in the seaport town of Neapolis,
known today as the city of Kavála.
And the preaching in Kavála
is still going strong,
with four congregations
busy with public witnessing
throughout the city,
including at the harbor
and at rest areas.
Kavála’s old city
is built on a hill,
where brothers and sisters
often climb many steep steps
to reach the homes in their territory.
The branch office in Greece
oversees the activity
of more than 30,000 publishers,
including 2,900
on the neighboring island nation of Cyprus.
They preach to a population
of about 11 million people,
often in some of the very same cities
where Paul preached in the first century,
including Thessalonica,
or modern-day Thessaloníki;
Beroea, or Véroia;
and the capital city of Athens.
We’ll end our visit to Greece
back in Macedonia,
where our Greek brothers and sisters
send their warmest greetings
from the Assembly Hall in Thessaloníki.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.